032.17 / C11 - Motor deficit and increased anxiety-like states in mice lacking an autism-associated gene Slit3

Slit proteins mediate axonal guidance, neuronal migration, and neuronal growth by interacting with Robo receptors, contributing to the development of neuronal connectivity and structure. Functional changes in Slit/Robo signaling has been implicated in the pathophysiology of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Altered expression of Slit or Robo receptors was reported in some individuals with ASD. A genetic variant of Slit3, one of genes encoding Slits, was also found in some individuals with ASD. However, the involvement of Slit3 mutation in the development of ASD symptoms has not been studied. Therefore, the aim of this study is to investigate behavioral changes resulting from Slit3 mutation in mice. We examined two- to four-month old male and female Slit3 knockout (KO) mice for social and repetitive behaviors, which are major diagnostic behaviors for ASD, as well as behaviors related to motor, anxiety, depression and cognition. Our data showed that Slit3-KO mice exhibited suppressed marble burying behaviors, implicating altered repetitive behavior, but normal social behaviors in the three-chamber social tests. Furthermore, Slit3-KO mice displayed hypolocomotion in the open field test and impaired motor coordination in the rotarod test. Anxiety-like behaviors were observed mainly in female Slit3 KO mice as they displayed stronger thigmotaxis in the open field test, spent less time in the open arm of the elevated plus maze, and made fewer transitions to the light compartment in the light/dark box compared to the respective controls. No differences were observed between KO and WT mice in recognition memory in the novel object recognition test or depression-like behavior in the tail suspension test. Taken together, deletion of the Slit3 gene did not lead to ASD-like symptoms in the social behavioral domain, but it may affect repetitive behaviors. In addition, the loss of Slit3 led to aberrant motor behavior and increased anxiety-like behaviors. Motor function disruptions and anxiety are highly co-occurring symptoms in ASD. The loss of Slit3 may disrupt neural circuits required for regulating motor function and anxiety, resulting in symptoms of motor dysfunction and anxiety in ASD.

