425.25 / III67 - Proteomic modification in hippocampal synapse following noninvasive brain stimulation

Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) is known to enhance cognitive performance and neuroplasticity, but its underlying mechanisms in the brain are still unknown. The purpose of this study was to investigate effects of tDCS on protein regulation in the hippocampal synapse. Two different current intensities (anodal 250uA and 500uA) of tDCS were applied to Sprague Dawley rats (male, 9-10 weeks old) for 30 min for 2 days, just before training and testing of passive avoidance test (PAT). Hippocampal synaptic proteins were profiled by the Waters Acquity UPLC M-class LC and normalized proteomic data were analyzed by multiple bioinformatics methods. Compared to the sham group, anodal 250uA tDCS upregulated 26 proteins, and 17 protein expression were down-regulated. The expression levels of only 20 proteins were significantly modified by anodal 500uA of tDCS when compared to the sham group. Multiple signalings were identified by GO enrichment analysis. From both tDCS intensities, membrane (GO:0016020) and synapse (GO:0045202) were significantly detected. Multiple terms associated with mitochondrial function were identified only from the anodal 500uA. Pathway analysis identified both shared and unique pathways between 250uA and 500uA. Inflammatory pathway (P00031) detected from both current intensities. Annotation clustering analysis identified some unique annotations, including PDZ domains (Enrichment score: 2.3 & 1.2, respectively). Multiple IPA networks were created for anodal 250uA and 500uA. The networks for both intensities are associated with Protein Synthesis and Cellular Development, Growth and Proliferation. Neurological Disease is the top disease detected from the comparison of 500uA and sham. Only one module created by WGCNA was significantly correlated with PAT latency, and 3 proteins (gdi1, ran & ndufs6) resulted in the most weighted connections in the module. Expression levels of these proteins were significantly associated with PAT latency. Best subset regression method to compare all possible regression models for both PAT latency and current intensity compared more than 800 models and identified 2 and 6 models for the variables of current intensity and PAT latency, respectively. Fabp7 were detected from all 8 regression models, and significantly inverse correlation between the expression of fabp7 and PAT latency were detected while a negative trend was observed with the increased intensity of tDCS. In conclusion, our data provide molecular evidence for effects of tDCS on the hippocampal synapse and suggest candidate synaptic molecules in the hippocampus that are modulated by anodal tDCS.
