486.03 / HH7 - A recursive bayesian updating scheme to model the effect of prediction on individuation

Predictive computation has become a prominent alternative to model the brain function. Consistent with such computational models, previous studies showed that prior information speeds up perceptual decisions for the detection of the location of a stimulus. In this study we present a recursive Bayesian updating scheme, in which posterior of an iteration is used as the prior of the next, to model empirical results of an individuation (detection of spatial location) task within the framework of predictive computation. In the behavioral experiment centrally presented task irrelevant cues, face or house, provided information about the prior probability of the upcoming image category. Next, an intact (target) image was shown on either left or right periphery. On the opposite side a scrambled version of the same image was presented. This was followed by presentation of masks, which were different scrambled versions of the target image. Participants' task was to indicate the spatial location of the intact target image while maintaining their fixation on the fixation dot during the trial. The validity of the category cue was set at 100%, 75%, 50%, 25% in different experimental sessions, and participants were informed about the probability of cue-validity prior to the experiments. In each trial, the duration of the target presentation was determined using an adaptive staircase procedure in a 2-AFC paradigm. Duration thresholds were computed in congruent and incongruent trials separately (in terms of cue-target category associations). Two-sample paired t-tests were conducted to investigate whether task irrelevant predictive cues (as priors) have an effect on duration thresholds in congruent and incongruent trials. The results showed that thresholds were higher in incongruent trials than in congruent trials only in 75%-validity condition, suggesting that prediction has an effect on individuation only when the prediction’s validity is relatively high (t(6)=-2.8919, p<0.0276). Our Bayesian scheme was able to successfully capture the pattern observed in human observers, suggesting that schemes with iterative priors may lead to better models of human behavior than approaches using static priors.
