333.14 / III20 - A visual bandit task in mice reveals a female-specific strategy associated with enhanced acquisition of the optimal choice

Neurodevelopmental disorders, such as autism spectrum disorders (ASD), have a strong male bias in diagnosis, and are associated with challenges in learning to predict positive outcomes of behavior. Do sex-specific mechanisms of goal-directed learning contribute to the male-specific vulnerability to ASD? One commonly used task, the multi-armed bandit, examines the dynamics of reinforcement learning and decision making, requiring a person or animal to choose each trial between exploitation of a previously experienced option, versus exploration of other options with unknown, but potentially more rewarding, outcomes. Visually cued bandit tasks have been widely employed in humans and nonhuman primates, but are largely unused in rodents. This has limited the ability to understand the neural mechanisms of complex reward environments in rodent models. We used a two-arm bandit task in thirty-two 129/B6 F1 mice (16 male and 16 female) to examine whether there are baseline sex differences in the ability to learning the reward probabilities associated with two visual cues presented on a touchscreen (80% chance of payoff versus 20%). Female mice learned to choose the cue associated with the higher probability of reward faster. A multiple linear regression analysis revealed that female mice relied more on spatial repetition in decision making at the early stage of learning, but switched from this strategy to using information of reward outcome of cues more rapidly than did male mice. We wished to examine neural mechanisms that might support these sex differences in strategy selection. Animals were sacrificed immediately following behavior on their final test day, and c-fos gene expression was used as a proxy for neural activity. In the nucleus accumbens, fos expression was more lateralized in females, while in males, fos expression was equal between left and right accumbens. This suggests that more lateralized activation of the brain in females may drive female-specific decision-making strategies that result in faster learning, and shed light on sex-specific mechanisms in neurodevelopmental disorders.
