227.10 / MM6 - Fear learning in stress vulnerable and resilient rats

Chronic stress can have a profound influence on mood and can increase the risk of depression, anxiety, and PTSD. However, not all humans who experience chronic stress develop these conditions, suggesting some people are specifically vulnerable to the effects of chronic stress. Several rodent models of stress vulnerability and stress resiliency have emerged over the past decade. We have previously shown that a subpopulation male Sprague Dawley rats subjected to chronic social defeat stress show indices of vulnerability including increased anxiety-like and depression-like behaviors. These stress vulnerable rats exhibit passive coping during repeated defeat as evidenced by short-latencies (SL) to be defeated, and we have used this model extensively to study stress vulnerability. Rats with long-latencies (LL) to social defeat are considered resilient to the effects of chronic stress, as they are similar to non-stressed control rats on measures of depression-like and anxiety-like behaviors. There is evidence that learning deficits may emerge in SL rats, including impaired reversal learning, however fear-related learning has not been well- studied in rats exhibiting individual differences in response to repeated social defeat. Here, we tested the hypothesis that SL rats have elevated fear-related memory and decreased fear extinction to a context in which they previously received foot shocks. We used a standard contextual fear training paradigm in which rats were given several foot shocks in a fear condition chamber (context), and then tested for freezing behavior over several days by re-exposure to the chamber (context) in the absence of the shock to test for extinction of the learned freezing response. We found that relative to resilient LL rats, SL rats had increased freezing when placed in the context 24 hours following the initial training trial. 24 h following this extinction trial, SL rats continued to show increased freezing in response to the context, suggesting, persistence of decreased extinction relative to LL rats. Finally, 11 days following testing for retention of extinction, SL rats continued to show increased freezing in response to the context, suggesting decreased retention of fear extinction. These data suggest that decreased fear extinction may accompany stress vulnerability, and these fear extinction deficits may persist long-term.
