287.01 / F22 - Experience-dependent synaptic plasticity in the lateral habenula

In everyday life, proper behavioral responses when foreseeing an unpleasant event are necessary for survival. Seminal work performed in awake monkeys indicated that neurons in the lateral portion of the epithalamic nucleus habenula (LHb) are excited upon a negative event. Furthermore, after conditioning an animal to recognize a neutral stimulus anticipating the occurrence of a punishment, LHb neurons show excitation when the conditioned stimulus is presented (Matsumoto and Hikosaka, 2007). However, whether synaptic adaptations occur within the LHb during learning, allowing anticipating an aversive stimulus, remains unknown. We hypothesized that, during the formation of an association between an external stimulus and the successive administration of a punishment, plasticity at excitatory synapses occurs in the LHb. To investigate this issue, we interrogated synaptic transmission onto LHb neurons in acute brain slices from animals at different stages of learning using an active avoidance paradigm (30 trials/day, 5 days). The animals learned to avoid a footshock preannounced by a tone already from the second and third sessions (“learners”). Control mice instead received the footshocks and the CS randomly, not contingently. 24h after training session 2 we measured spontaneous excitatory postsynaptic currents (sEPSC) in acute brain slices containing the LHb. The frequency of sEPSCs, but not amplitude, was significantly increased in the LHb of learners, compared to control mice. Recording trains of EPSCs revealed similar paired-pulse ratios between learners and controls. We then measured AMPA and NMDA currents elicited by electrical stimulation within the LHb, observing a significant increase in AMPA/NMDA ratio in learners compared to controls. Furthermore, this AMPA/NMDA increase was similarly observed when evoking EPSCs using uncaged glutamate in the proximity of dendrites. These data suggest that learning to predict an aversive stimulus engages post-synaptic strengthening at excitatory synapses in the LHb.
