333.30 / III36 - Increased curiosity enhances memory in older adults

Curiosity is a fundamental aspect of intrinsically motivated learning, but there are many open questions regarding the cognitive and neural mechanisms by which curiosity drives learning. Previous research has suggested that curiosity may leverage basic reward mechanisms, where desired information is the reward, and curiosity can be viewed as the drive to obtain it. This framework makes predictions regarding how curiosity might change across the lifespan. Reward sensitivity is thought to decrease with healthy aging as a function of decreased dopaminergic activity. This suggests that, to the extent that curiosity is related to these same mechanisms, curiosity should also decrease with age. This prediction is consistent with the conventional wisdom that curiosity declines with age. However, few empirical studies have tested this prediction about aging, and those that do exist have provided inconsistent results. A better understanding of the relationship between curiosity and age could help test the reward hypothesis and potentially shed light on other potential mechanisms of curiosity.
We conducted two studies designed to examine age related changes in curiosity. In both studies, groups of older and younger adults were shown a series of trivia questions. For each question, participants chose whether to wait up to 30 seconds to see the answer, or to immediately skip to the next question. Choosing to wait was interpreted as a measure of curiosity. After the task, participants were given a surprise memory test for the answers to questions that they waited for. In Study 1, behavioral results showed that older adults were more likely to wait for answers than younger adults. Moreover, older adults were more likely to correctly recall the answers on the memory test. Study 2 sought to replicate and further investigate these findings, repeating the behavioral assessment while participants were scanned with fMRI with two new groups of older and younger adults. Behaviorally, the results of Study 2 replicated those of Study 1: older participants were more willing to wait for answers and also had better recall memory for the answers. fMRI results show that the decision to wait for information is related to increased BOLD activity in the striatum, DLPFC, and VMPFC in young participants, consistent with the “information as reward” hypothesis. Together, these results raise the possibility that while reward mechanisms may contribute to curiosity-driven learning in young adults, there may be other additional mechanisms contributing to curiosity in older adults, which may instead be related more to semantic knowledge.
