019.02 - Vagus nerve stimulation epigenetically modulates learning and memory

Vagus Nerve Stimulation (VNS) is known to enhance learning and memory in rodents and humans. However, the mechanisms behind these cognitive improvements are unclear. Here, we present evidence that epigenetic modulation of stress response signaling and plasticity plays a prominent role in VNS-enhanced learning and memory. In this study, rats that received 30 minutes of intermittent VNS bursts on 4 consecutive days showed improved learning and memory, along with changes in cortical, hippocampal, and blood transcription profiles and epigenetic marks. Many of the significantly changed transcripts correlated with behavioral performance in an object recognition memory task. Interestingly, similar transcriptional changes occurred in a cohort of rats that did not participate in any behavioral task, suggesting that VNS stimulation alone is sufficient to drive the changes. Significant VNS-induced cortical changes included decreased stress response signaling (NF-κB) and increased neural-remodeling (ARC) and translation elongation-related (DPH1) transcripts, while the most significant hippocampal changes included reduced potassium channel (KCNH5), phospholipase (HRASLS), and calcium release inhibition (CAR-8) transcripts. Despite differences in the overall transcription-change landscape between the cortex and hippocampus, tissue from both regions showed reductions in stress response signaling (including NF-κB), and changes in immediate early gene (IEG) and histone-related transcripts. Reduced NF-κB signaling during VNS has been assumed to be a downstream effect of reduced inflammatory cytokines. However, in our study, we observed few changes in inflammatory markers, yet identified significant effects of epigenetic modulation and stress response signaling that correlated with behavioral performance. Our results indicate that VNS-induced learning and memory effects may be primarily mediated through non-inflammatory, epigenetically-driven NF-κB signaling and associated effects such as double strand break (DSB) repair at γH2A.X-marked sites. This is consistent with our transcriptional profiling evidence and finding that DSBs were decreased in the brain tissue of stimulated rats. Taken together, the results demonstrate that epigenetic modulation plays a prominent role in VNS-enhanced learning and memory by 1) altering neural signaling and plasticity gene expression through DNA methylation and histone modifications, 2) reducing stress response signaling, and 3) promoting efficient repair of double strand breaks that occur during transcription of plasticity genes.
