486.08 / HH12 - Confidence about choices informs changes of strategy based on feedback

Natural environments are dynamic and their changes can render known reward associations and previously successful decision strategies ineffective. When environment changes are not explicitly cued, we can learn about them and adjust our decision strategy only based on the outcome of ongoing and past decisions. An essential computation for such learning is to determine whether negative feedbacks can be attributed to changes of the environment. We had previously shown that a Bayesian decision maker would depend on the expected accuracy of past choices to solve this attribution problem (Purcell & Kiani, 2016). Here, we test whether humans rely on their subjective confidence about choices that led to negative feedback in order to detect environment changes and update their decision strategy. Six participants performed a variant of the direction discrimination task (Britten et al, 1992). On each trial, subjects observed a patch of random dots surrounded by four targets. Each target was an elongated bar. The net motion direction was either rightward or leftward, and the targets were arranged into two pairs of right-left above and below the dots. We refer to the pairs as the upper and lower environments. Only one environment was active on each trial. The active environment stayed fixed for a random number of trials and then switched without an explicit cue. Subjects made a single saccade to one of the targets to simultaneously report their direction choice (right or left), environment choice (upper or lower), and confidence about motion direction (saccade landing point along the target). Feedback was not dependent on confidence and positive feedback was given only if the chosen target represented both the correct motion direction and the active environment. Consequently, subjects could receive negative feedback because of their mistakes about motion direction or because of changes in the environment. We show that human subjects were much more likely to switch environment following negative feedback on trials in which they were more confident about motion direction. Further, subjects were more likely to switch after a sequence of negative feedbacks, especially when they were associated with higher confidence. Finally, the influence of confidence on environment switches could not be explained by objective difficulty, as negative feedback on trials with similar motion strengths could lead to staying in the old environment or switching, depending on confidence. The results indicate that humans integrate their confidence across past choices to guide future decision strategy, mimicking a Bayesian decision maker.
