227.01 / LL11 - Optogenetically-induced plasticity in the rat medial prefrontal cortex can impair or enhance attentional set-shifting

Relapse and residual symptoms of stress-related mood and anxiety disorders remain problematic, and a poor understanding of the neurobiology underlying these illnesses has limited new treatments. Imaging studies show reduced activity in the mPFC in both depression and PTSD are associated with deficits in executive functions, including impaired cognitive flexibility, that not only represent symptoms of these illnesses, but also contribute to their development and maintenance. Such changes presumably involve aberrant forms of neural plasticity in the mPFC. Similarly, chronic stress compromises cognitive flexibility, and is likely to disrupt the plasticity that underlies this executive process, which is measured using the attentional set-shifting test. Further, CUS attenuates the response of the mPFC to stimulation of the mediodorsal thalamus (MDT), an excitatory afferent. Thus, we are using optogenetics to investigate if directly inducing long-term depression (LTD) in the mPFC is sufficient to mimic CUS-induced set-shifting deficits, and if directly inducing long-term potentiation (LTP) in the mPFC restores cognitive flexibility after CUS. Glutamatergic neurons in the MDT were selectively transfected with the ChETA variant of channelrhodopsin and allowed 6 weeks for expression and trafficking to terminals innervating the mPFC. First, rats were anesthetized and baseline field potentials evoked by MDT stimulation were recorded in the mPFC for 15 min. Then, optical LTD (900 light pulses, 1 ms at 1 Hz for 15 min) or LTP (10 x 1 s trains of pulses, 1 ms at 250 Hz, over 100 s) were induced by stimulating mPFC terminals with 472nm light and field recordings continued for an additional three hours. The LTD protocol induced a depressed mPFC response to MDT stimulation to 75% of baseline (n=4; p<0.0001), while the LTP protocol increased the response to 125% of baseline (n=4; p <0.002). We then used these protocols to test the effect of LTD/LTP on set-shifting in awake rats. ChETA-injected rats that received the LTD protocol 1 hr prior to set-shifting required significantly more trials than either control group (n=10-14/group; one-way ANOVA, p<0.01). Thus, LTD in the mPFC produced a deficit similar to that observed after CUS. To test if directly inducing LTP in the mPFC is sufficient to restore cognitive flexibility after CUS, a separate cohort underwent CUS treatment prior to cognitive testing. CUS animals receiving LTP 30 min prior to set-shifting took significantly fewer trials than non-potentiated CUS rats (n=7-13/group, one way-ANOVA p<0.001). These data suggest that set-shifting is regulated by plasticity within the mPFC, specifically in response to the MDT afferent.
