333.19 / III25 - Neuro-computational mechanisms for deciding with predicting others

In social environments, expectation of reward for ourselves and associated decision-making often depend on others' behavior. Thus, our decision processes should include consideration about others’ decisions. However, a fundamental of the computational process is still poorly understood: how humans integrate the prediction of others' behavior into self-oriented decisions. To address this issue, we devised a novel behavioral task in human fMRI, combined with computational modeling. In our task, there is a main trial together with two types of control trial, self and other trials. Main trial required the subject to choose an option, using the prediction of others' choice, because a set of options to choose depended upon the others' choice. Self and other trials examined each component in the main trial, which is making probabilistic self-value-based decisions and predicting others' decisions, respectively. Probing the behavior, we first confirmed that the subject's behavior followed self-value difference and predicted-others' value difference in the self and other trials, respectively. In the main trials, the subject’s decision followed the self-value difference generated by predictions of others’ choices. That is, the subject’s choice was governed by a balance of the two possible self-value differences that corresponded to two different predictions of others' choices. The relative contribution of the two self-value differences varied along with the uncertainty in predicting others' choices. We then examined the BOLD signals, using model-based analysis. First, we found that activations in right temporoparietal junction (rTPJ) and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) were significantly correlated to prediction uncertainty of others’ decision, so that at the group level, the individuals’ higher activations in these regions are related to efficiency in using the prediction of others to guide their decisions. The activations in these regions are also significantly correlated to the predictions in both main and other trials. Second, we found that the mPFC responses are significantly activated by self-decisions in both self and main trials. Third, using psychophysiological interaction analysis, we found that the rTPJ activations had impact on the mPFC responses, only mediated through the responses in right inferior frontal gyrus. Taken together, these findings suggest that predicting about others’ behavior recruits additional neuro-computational process for using the uncertainty in the prediction to integrate the prediction to generating self-oriented decisions.
