227.09 / MM5 - The relationship between cumulative stress exposure and hippocampal activation during contextual memory

Background: Exposure to stressful events is common, with a wide range of types and number of stressful events endorsed, even within healthy populations. Memory impairments have been reported in people exposed to early life stress and trauma. Literature documents the role of the hippocampus (hpc) in memory processes, including encoding and recall of items and complex contextual scenes. Contextual memory is of particular interest, as recent findings suggest that deficits in contextual memory could contribute to impairments in fear modulation in post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). To further investigate relationships between contextual memory and exposure to stress, we examined hpc activation during contextual memory processing and cumulative stress exposure in a sample of healthy adults. Methods: Eighteen healthy participants, 10 female, aged 20 to 42 years (M = 27.9, SD = 7.18) reported the total number and mode of stressful events experienced throughout their life on the Life Events Checklist (LEC; Weathers et al., 2013). All participants underwent fMRI scanning while completing the Context Separation and Completion (CSC) task to assess memory for complex contextual scenes. Participants encoded two target scenes (living room and office) and then categorized a series of ambiguous images as more like the living room, more like the office, or neither/both, based on their recall of the encoded target scenes. Results: Across all participants, we found a significant positive relationship between number of stressful events reported as “happened to me” and hpc activation during the CSC task (p < .001, uncorrected). There was no significant relationship between number of “happened to me” stressful events and accuracy on the CSC (p = .27). Discussion: Our results illustrate that hpc activation during contextual memory is associated with cumulative stress exposure in a healthy adult sample. Our findings suggest that greater hpc activation in people exposed to more stressful events may be compensatory since no relationship between accuracy and stress exposure was observed. We will use this paradigm to investigate relationships between PTSD symptoms, fear modulation, and hpc activation during contextual memory.
