425.18 / III60 - A unique mouse model of early-life exercise enables lasting hippocampal synaptic plasticity and memory

Exercise in adulthood is a powerful regulator of cognitive function. Molecular mechanisms underlying exercise’s effects on hippocampus-dependent learning and memory have been extensively characterized in rodent models. Less known is whether exercise taking place during early-life periods of hippocampal development can regulate its function later in life. It is well established that exogenous experiences occurring during early-life developmental periods can have long-lasting effects on memory and neuronal function. We address the hypothesis that aerobic exercise occurring during specific periods of postnatal hippocampal maturation can have enduring consequences on hippocampus-dependent memory and synaptic plasticity. In addition, we explore molecular and epigenetic mechanisms that may give rise to the persistent changes in neuronal function engaged by early-life exercise. Wild-type C57Bl/6J mice were placed in cages with either locked or unlocked running wheels on day of weaning (postnatal day (P) 21) for three exercise durations: a 3-week juvenile-adolescent period (P 21-41); a 1-week juvenile period (P21-27), and a 1-week period of later adolescence (P35-41). Subthreshold and threshold training durations for long-term memory formation were identified in the Object Location Memory (OLM) task in a separate group of age-matched sedentary mice. Between P43-P50, mice from running-wheel exposed groups were then tested in the OLM task or were used to examine long-term potentiation (LTP), a form of synaptic plasticity, in hippocampal CA1 Schaffer collateral pathway. Both the 3-week exercise group and the 1 week juvenile-exercise group formed long-term memory for novel object location when exposed to a typically subthreshold training duration for memory acquisition. LTP was increased in adolescent mice that underwent early life exercise during the juvenile-adolescent period. Notably, input/output curves generated in the Schaffer collaterals showed greater fEPSP responses in early-life exercised groups compared to sedentary controls. Neuronal gene expression and histone modifications after OLM training of exercised mice will be measured by RT-qPCR and ChIP-qPCR, respectively, for candidate genes identified by transcriptome sequencing. These preliminary results suggest that early-life exercise can improve spatial memory and synaptic plasticity and identifies a juvenile, critical period of hippocampal plasticity during which an exercise experience can have a lasting effect on memory function.
