425.22 / III64 - The role of the basolateral amygdala complex in consolidation of second-order conditioned fear

This study pursued our recent findings that consolidation of a second-order fear memory requires DNA methylation, but not de novo protein synthesis, in the basolateral amygdala complex (BLA). It specifically used an animal model (fear conditioning in rats) to examine whether the BLA gene and protein networks that have been implicated in the consolidation of first-order conditioned fear (e.g., established through tone-shock pairings) are also involved in the consolidation of second-order conditioned fear (established when tone-shock pairings in stage 1 of training are followed by light-tone pairings in stage 2). The genes of interest were analysed using RT-PCR: they were selected for their relevance to kinase signalling pathways (e.g., PKA, PKC, CaMKII, CaMKIV, MAPK1, MAP2K7) and nuclear processes (e.g., CREBBP, EGR-1 and DNMT3A) that have been differentially implicated in consolidation of first- and second-order conditioned fear. The protein networks were analysed using TMT-10plex LC-MS/MS.
 Relative to controls that received tone-shock pairings in stage 1 and context alone exposures in stage 2, rats that underwent second-order conditioning (i.e., that received tone-shock pairings in stage 1 and light-tone pairings in stage 2) exhibited a unique profile of gene and protein changes in the BLA. There were three major findings. First, all genes included in our analyses were upregulated in the control group that was re-exposed to the conditioned context. Second, after second-order conditioning, the majority of these genes were NOT upregulated; and a network of proteins was explicitly downregulated. Third, this dowregulated network of proteins included Mapk1, Map2k7, Mras and Rasa1, which we have previously shown to play a limited role in consolidation of second-order fear.
Taken together, these results provide molecular support for our recent findings that consolidation of second-order fear does not require ERK/MAPK signalling or de novo protein synthesis in the BLA. They are discussed with respect to the established roles for CaMK signalling and DNA methylation in consolidation of second-order fear and other types of memory.
