333.08 / III14 - Smooth pursuit eye movements as dynamic readout of reward-based target selection in healthy and Parkinson’s disease participants

The efficient selection of one out of several options relies on the estimate of the consequences of this selection, such as a reward or a punishment. The Iowa Gambling Task (IGT, Bechara et al., 1994) has been widely used to test reward-based decision-making performance, when the selection of each particular target was associated to a stochastic reward schedule with varying global payoffs. The IGT has allowed unveiling specific deficits in Parkinson’s Disease (PD) patients. Voluntary eye movements efficiently adapt to the contextual requirements in humans, including reward contingencies, under several experimental conditions. Work from our group and others demonstrates that when tracking a visual moving target, smooth pursuit eye movements are dynamically modulated by reward in the very early phases, including prediction-driven anticipation (Damasse et al., 2018). Here we designed a novel smooth pursuit task inspired by the IGT where participants had to track one of two moving targets associated with different schedules of monetary gains or losses. In the main experiment, each target’s direction was associated either with a globally advantageous (yielding an overall gain across trials), or disadvantageous (yielding an overall loss) schedule. In the baseline condition, the target to be tracked was explicitly instructed (e.g. “Follow the black target”) and the overall monetary gain did not depend on the oculomotor performance. Participants were patients diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease (PD), tested both ON and OFF Dopamine medication. We also tested age-matched and young healthy controls. We analyzed reward-based pursuit behavior during different epochs, namely the anticipation phase preceding target motion onset, the visually-guided initiation (which typically follows the vector-average of the two motion signals -Joshua and Lisberger, 2011), and the steady-state tracking phase. In young controls, but not in the other groups, smooth eye movements were dramatically biased, in the main experiment, toward the selected direction, both during the anticipatory epoch and the vector-averaging initiation. PD patients’ and age-matched controls’ eye movements did not express target selection until after the vector-average phase, about 300ms after target motion onset. Finally, during the late pursuit epoch, PD patients showed larger instability and more frequent changes of mind about which target to be tracked. Overall our results point to significant differences across experimental groups in target selection during different time epoch of a reward-based choice-pursuit task.
