066.27 / PP11 - Practice makes perfect: Repeated sexual experience enhances sexual motivation as female rats approach middle-age

Reproductive senescence is an inevitable aspect of female aging. Nevertheless, our understanding of how sexual behavior changes across the lifespan is limited. The current study investigated the effects of repeated sexual experience as female rats approach middle age (12 mos. old). Females rats (aged experienced; n=10) were tested for partner preference (2x per month, from young adulthood to middle age). In the partner preference test, each subject is given the choice to interact with a same-sex conspecific or a sexually vigorous male, which allows for the opportunity to mate. With repeated tests, female rats increased time spent with the male, displayed more solicitation behaviors, and were less likely to leave the male after mounts. However, female rats became less active over time, visiting the stimulus animals less frequently. A separate group of age-matched, hormone-yoked female rats (aged virgins; n=11) were left to age alongside the sexually-experienced group and then mated for the first time at 12 mos. old when the experienced group received their final mating test. Aged virgins spent significantly less time with the male and displayed fewer solicitation behaviors than their experienced counterparts. We also compared mating behavior on the first test of young adult rats (young virgins, 2 months old) to the first test of middle-aged rats (aged virgins, 12 months old). Aged virgins took longer to return to the male after intromissions and displayed fewer solicitation behaviors than young virgins during their first sexual encounter. Finally, aged virgins were less active, visiting the stimulus animals less frequently than young virgins. Taken together, these results suggest that repeated mating encounters increase sexual motivation, even as females transition into middle age and that delaying the first mating encounter until middle age leads to reduced sexual motivation relative to a first mating encounter as a young adult. We also found a number of specific effects of aging on partner preference. In summary, these findings add to our understanding of changes in reproductive behavior across the lifespan.
