086.02 / HHH25 - The effects of physical activity and multi-day rTMS on brain network plasticity

Aberrant neuroplasticity is a pathophysiological trait shared by a number of psychiatric disorders. Investigating novel methods of influencing neuroplasticity may lead to new treatment approaches. Aerobic exercise (AE) and repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) are individually capable of inducing neuroplasticity and improving cognitive function. AE upregulates neurotrophic mechanisms at a cellular and molecular level, while rTMS has demonstrable effects on the functional connectivity profile of particular brain networks. These two approaches may have a synergizing impact when utilised in tandem. Here we sought to determine whether regular engagement in high levels of AE can enhance the effects of multi-day rTMS. We hypothesised that physical fitness (an indirect indicator of AE engagement) interacts with the effects of high-frequency rTMS on synaptic efficacy, network connectivity, and memory performance. A sample of N=36 subjects consisting of (i) highly active individuals (> 150 minutes per week), and (ii) sedentary individuals (< 20 minutes of AE ≤ 3 times per week) completed two separate weeks of individually neuronavigated 20Hz rTMS (2s on, 28s off). A region of left parietal cortex functionally connected to a cortico-hippocampal network supporting declarative memory was targeted in one week, and a (pre-) supplementary motor area with functional connectivity to a cortico-basal ganglia network supporting procedural memory was targeted in the other. VO2 max testing quantified cardiorespiratory fitness level, and multi-modal MRI and cognitive measures were collected pre and post to assess changes to GABA concentration, functional connectivity, and memory performance. A preliminary pooled analysis shows no significant differences to GABA concentration (p > 0.05, partial η2 = 0.03) or memory performance following multi-day rTMS to either of the targeted networks (p > 0.05, partial η2 = 0.01). Relationships between observed outcomes, functional connectivity, and physical fitness will be analysed at completion of data collection (N=40). In contrast to past studies, our preliminary findings suggest that applying multi-day rTMS to memory networks in the healthy brain does not produce demonstrable long-lasting improvements to declarative or procedural memory. Furthermore, multi-day rTMS may not be associated with long-term changes to extrasynaptic GABA concentration, and instead may relate to other neuroplastic mechanisms, or occur at a synaptic scale where effects are indiscernible with MR spectroscopy.
