227.14 / MM10 - The interplay between antidepressants and mitochondria in a mouse model with decreased mitochondrial complex I function

An increasing body of evidence points toward the involvement of suboptimal mitochondrial function (SMF) in depression and other mood disorders. Several clinical and preclinical studies show that depression is associated with altered mitochondrial structure and function. Furthermore, stress, a major risk factor for depression, directly influences mitochondrial function. Also, it seems that different antidepressants influence the mitochondria in different ways, for better or for worse. It is for example known that fluoxetine (Prozac) can have a negative effect on mitochondrial function while ketamine can have a positive effect. The aim of this study is to investigate the interaction between different antidepressants, fluoxetine and ketamine, and mitochondrial function on the behavior of stressed mice. To test this, a new genetically engineered mouse model was used. These animals have a deficiency of the NDUFS4 protein (Ndufs4def mice), a structural protein of complex I (CI), an essential component of the electron transport chain and oxidative phosphorylation. This deficiency leads to a 25% reduction of CI activity in the brain compared to WT mice. Despite this reduction, Ndufs4def mice exhibited no differences in body weight, physical activity, and motor coordination compared to their WT littermates. These animals, together with their WT littermates, are chronically stressed for 21 days and are treated with either fluoxetine or ketamine. We will report on depression-like phenotype in the various experimental groups assessed by a battery of behavioral tests as well as physiological and biochemical measures. We will also report on the effect of stress and mitochondrial complex activity with or without the use of antidepressants. Results from these experiments would provide novel insights into personalization in drug choice because they will provide alerts to possible adverse drug events as well as facilitate optimal treatment selection in stress-related mood disorders.
