333.01 / III7 - Psychophysics of political preferences mediated by information

Unlike value-based decision-making, it is not immediately obvious that political decisions are made using some principled evaluation of alternatives that can be operationalized in the lab. Many scholars consider politics to be a privileged class of decision-making, much like religious beliefs, that defy logical thought processes. Since the mid-20th century, political science has tried to make sense of this behavior, first using normative economic and later decision theoretic models that have been of great use in neuroscience. One school of thought holds political awareness and exposure to new information as the key mediators to political preference change, whereas others emphasize the role of partisanship. Here, we developed a novel psychophysics task that orthogonalizes partisanship and information flow to evaluate the optimal conditions for preference change—one which renders political decision-making tractable to neuroeconomic-style analysis. Over 500 Amazon Mechanical Turk subjects and 100 traditional lab participants engaged in this task, which consists of making preference ratings on real proposed laws that have appeared before US Congress. Subjects first reported their preferences based solely on a synopsis of the proposal—subsequently they must reevaluate those preferences after learning about the true percent of Congressmen of each party that voted in favor of the proposed law. Proposals uniformly tiled the space of Democratic and Republican support and were controlled for their intrinsic perceived partisanship, i.e., the true levels of support for each bill were completely uncorrelated with participants’ estimates of that support. Behavioral results among both study populations dichotomized the pool: roughly 50% of subjects exhibited robust preference changes (to one or both partisan signals) while the remainder did not. Neither trait-level political awareness nor partisanship alone account for this divide, which casts doubt on the established awareness model for political preference shifts. This result, persistent across repetitions, is key to ongoing functional imaging work that examines political preference representation in the brain. Previous studies report a common currency among neural correlates of economic value and this work will assess whether political preferences lie in this same axis.
