287.17 / G12 - Effects of temperature during brain slice preparation on the physiology of cortical neurons

Preparation of acute brain slices for ex vivo electrophysiology typically involves cooling the brain in “ice-cold” (< 4 °C) artificial cerebral spinal fluid (aCSF), which is thought to slow cellular metabolism and minimize excitotoxicity following ischemic insult during brain dissection. Yet previous studies have reported that preparation of hippocampal brain slices in ice-cold temperature results in a dramatic reduction of dendritic spines in CA1 neurons, with spine regrowth and proliferation occurring during post-slice re-warming of the tissue (Kirov et al., Neuroscience 127:69-80, 2004). A subsequent study (Bourne et al., Neuropharmacology 52:55-59, 2007) found that preparation at warmer temperatures (~25 °C) prevented the loss and proliferation of dendritic spines. We tested the impact of temperature during tissue preparation on the physiology and morphology of retrogradely-labeled corticopontine (CPn) neurons in layer 5 of the medial prefrontal cortex (PFC). Eighteen Adult mice were injected with fluorescent retrobeads (Lumafluor) in the pons to retrogradely label CPn neurons; acute brain slices were then prepared several days later using either ice-cold (< 4°C; n = 5 female and 4 male mice) or room temperature (25 °C; n = 5 female and 4 male mice) aCSF. After cutting, slices were incubated in 35 °C aCSF for an hour before electrophysiological recordings were made (also at 35 °C) from labeled CPn neurons. Qualitatively, we could not distinguish any obvious differences in the health or number of targetable neurons (labeled or unlabeled) in slices prepared in iced or room-temperature aCSF. Further, we found no significant differences in resting membrane potentials (p = 0.23), input resistances (p = 0.35), or HCN-channel-mediated responses (p = 0.60) in the two experimental conditions (n = 30 for each). Action potential kinetics were also similar in most respects, including spike threshold (p = 0.76), amplitude (p = 0.25), and rise-time (p = 0.09). However, action potential half-widths were slightly longer (at 568 ± 13 vs 510 ± 15 µs; p = 0.005) in CPn neurons in slices prepared at room temperature. No sex-dependent differences were observed in either condition. These results confirm that healthy slices can be obtained in the absence of significant brain cooling (see Huang & Uuisaari, Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience 7:48, 2013). We are currently testing the impact of temperature during slicing on spine morphology.
