333.18 / III24 - Data-driven mapping of over 100 naturalistic tasks in the human brain

The central issue in neuroimaging is to reveal how our daily cognitive processes are represented in the brain. The tasks generally used in standard neuroimaging studies have been far from our daily activity, and may have not efficiently evoked cognitive processes in the naturalistic situation. It has also been unknown how cognitive processes underlying various daily activities are mutually related. To tackle these issues, we performed fMRI experiments for each subject with over 100 naturalistic tasks. By combining a data-driven mapping and interpretation based on the meta-data, we examined cortical organization of multiple naturalistic tasks.We prepared 103 naturalistic tasks, which can be performed without any pre-experimental training. Six participants (ages 22-33, 2 female) performed tasks while we recorded the evoked brain activity using a 3T MRI scanner (Siemens Trio TIM; TR = 2000 ms, voxel size = 2 mm isotropic, multiband factor = 3). The experiment was composed of 18 runs. Each run contained 77-83 tasks with duration of 6-12 s. We built a voxel-wise encoding model (R=FW), where R was brain activity, F represented 103-dimensional task-feature vectors (1/0 for each time point), and the weight matrix W was estimated using an L2-regularized linear regression. Model accuracy was calculated using Pearson's correlation coefficient between predicted and measured activity in the hold-out test dataset. To examine the dominant cognitive factors that underlie the activity patterns, we performed principal-component analysis (PCA) with the estimated weight matrix. The top PCs contrasted the tasks regarding their sensory factors such as auditory features (e.g., Music category judgment), and cognitive factor such as language features (e.g., Metaphor comprehension). Projections of the PC coefficients into the cortical space revealed that the auditory PC showed large weight in the bilateral temporal regions, while the language PC showed large weight in the bilateral fronto-temporal regions.To assess cognitive factors related to each PC, we calculated Pearson’s correlation coefficients between each PC map and the reference terms in Neurosynth (Yarkoni et al., 2011). The language PC map had higher correlation with the term ‘semantic’, and ‘sentence’, while the auditory PC map had higher correlation with the term ‘listening’, and ’sounds’.Using t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding, we further found a distinct task distribution in the cognitive map, such that Shopping task was closely positioned to Money counting task. Our data-driven method provides a new insight into the cortical implementation of the cognitive map in the naturalistic situation.
