066.12 / OO14 - Diet-induced obesity impairs male rat copulation and dopamine synthesis in the medial preoptic area

Rationale: High fat diet-induced obesity impairs male fertility via well-documented peripheral effects, but less is known about the impact of obesity on male central regulation of reproduction. Here we examined whether high fat diet-induced obesity affects male rat copulatory performance, and whether this effect is mediated by alterations in synthesis of gonadotropin-releasing hormones (GnRH) and dopamine in the hypothalamic medial preoptic area (MPOA). Methods: Adult Long Evans male rats were fed on a high fat diet (HFD; total calorie 21.92 kJ/g, including 13.15 kJ/g as fat) or a control diet (LFD; total calorie 16.10 kJ/g, including 1.61 kJ/g as fat) for 8 weeks. Rats were mated with an estrogen- and progesterone-treated (10µg/kg and 0.5 mg/kg, respectively) ovariectomized adult female, for 30 minutes after first intromission under red dim light. Behavior during mating was scored for total frequency of mounts (MF), intromissions (IF) and ejaculations (EF), latency to first mount (ML), first intromission (IL) and first ejaculation (EL), and intromission ratio (IR = IF/IF+MF). After an overnight fast, fresh MPOA tissues and blood samples were collected at decapitation for qRT-PCR of Gnrh1 and tyrosine hydrolase (Th) and plasma glucose analyses. Results: HFD rats displayed higher total body weights, growth rate percentage and plasma glucose levels. HFD rats also showed fewer intromissions and ejaculations, and took longer to initiate first mount and first intromissions. Furthermore, there was a 0.48-fold reduction in mRNA expression of the dopamine-synthesizing Th in the MPOA. No change in Gnrh1 mRNA expression was observed. There was also a trend for positive correlation between Th expression fold and copulatory parameters. Conclusion: Our data suggests that high fat diet-induced obesity impairs male rat copulatory performance, and this effect may be mediated by the dopaminergic system in the MPOA. As dopamine is involved in a range of motivated behaviors, including feeding and copulation, prolonged latency to mount and intromission and few mounting attempts therefore might reflect a diminished motivation to engage in sexual activity in obese animals.
