079.06 / CCC8 - The role of subcutaneous single injection in the effect of psychostimulant drugs and THC on the behavior of adult male rats

Psychostimulants as well as cannabinoids have been shown to affect a great variety of behaviors in both, humans and laboratory animals, in a serious manner. Our previous studies repeatedly demonstrated that control groups with saline injection(s) have displayed changes in different behavioral tests when compared to absolute controls (without any injection). Therefore, our present study has set three aims: (1) to evaluate the effect of three different psychostimulant drugs; (2) to evaluate the effect of three doses of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC); and (3) to evaluate the effect of saline, ethanol solvent or injection per se (sham) on spontaneous behavior of adult male rats. LABORAS test (Metris B.V., Netherlands) was used to examine spontaneous locomotor activity and exploratory behavior in unknown environment during 1 hour. In Experiment 1, psychostimulant drugs were tested: single subcutaneous (s.c.) injection of amphetamine (5mg/kg), cocaine (5mg/kg) and MDMA (5mg/kg) was applied prior to testing. Control group received s.c. saline injection in the same volume (1 ml/kg). In Experiment 2, three doses of THC (1; 2 and 5 mg/kg, s.c.) were examined. As a control s.c. injection of solvent (ethanol) was used. In Experiment 3, injections of saline and ethanol were compared to group with sham s.c. injection and to group of absolute control without any injection. Our results demonstrated that (1) all psychostimulants increased the locomotion, distance traveled and the velocity, while decreasing the duration of immobility of adult male rats relative to saline controls. The most prominent effect was found after MDMA injection. (2) The effect of THC was dose dependent and was the most apparent within the first 10 minutes of the LABORAS test. (3) As a matter of the effect of injection: absolute controls (without injection) when compared to animals injected with ethanol, saline or sham displayed lowered time spent in immobility, traveled longer distance and displayed increased velocity. In conclusion, our data showed different changes in behavior of adult male rats after application of either psychostimulants or cannabinoids. Our findings also suggest that not only drugs, but also single injection per se affects behavior of laboratory animals in unknown environment. This effect seems to be associated with acute stress reaction.

