032.04 / B30 - Cortical network graphs and dynamic functional connectivity in a mouse model of autism spectrum disorder

Spectrum Disorder (ASD). However, the patterns of these findings are highly heterogeneous and inconsistent between studies. This is likely due to the complex etiologies and behavioral phenotypes of ASD. Thus, a detailed understanding of aberrant connectivity patterns, their underlying neurobiological mechanisms, and relationship to behavioral pathologies would benefit considerably by large-scale functional connectivity analyses in well-controlled animal models of different putative ASD genetic and epigenetic etiologies. Here we used a combination of functional connectivity analyses and graph theoretical approaches to build a detailed map of cortical connectivity patterns in an in utero Valproic acid exposure mouse model of ASD and saline-exposed controls. We investigated cortical connectivity patterns at a high spatial and temporal resolution by using through-skull, wide field calcium imaging to record activity of GCAMP6f-expressing pyramidal cells across the entire dorsal cortex of awake, head-fixed mice. We imaged resting-state activity and evoked responses to auditory, tactile, and visual stimuli. We then used seed-based correlation analyses to build graphs of functional networks both across entire 12-minute resting-state recording sessions (e.g. static functional connectivity) and within 30-second sliding-window epochs (e.g. dynamic functional connectivity). Furthermore, we investigated whether graph features of stimulus-evoked networks differed between groups. Finally, to better elucidate the relationships of these cortical network graphs to behavioral pathologies, we correlated individual animals’ graph characteristics to the results of an extensive battery of neurodevelopmental and behavioral tests performed from birth through young adulthood in each animal. This work lays the groundwork for understanding the neurobiological underpinnings of ASD-related aberrant cortical connectivity patterns.

